---
layout: post
title: Someone reminded me to update my blog
---

h1. "{{ page.title }}":{{ page.url }}

p(meta). 09 Feb 2009 - Johannesburg


Today, someone tweeted me and reminded me that my blog is one of the most shamefully neglected corners of cyberspace. Since I've never had anyone express interest in my blog before, I've never really felt too bad. But the fact that someone actually took notice means that I need to repent and become a more devout blogger.

I've been using Rails 2.3 for the past week or two. Well, 2.3 RC1 to be precise. It seems more than stable - certainly I've yet to run into any issues with it. And truly, the output of rake routes is a joy to behold now that all the formatted routes crap is gone. I don't know that we use enough routes in any of our projects for it to make a *huge* difference memory-wise, but I'll test that when I upgrade one of our older projects from Rails 2.1 to 2.3. Mostly I haven't because I've just been a bit lazy. Considering it's about 10 minutes worth of work (plus a few more to test), I really just need to buckle down and do it.

In other news, since I've been working more closely with other developers, I've actually started remembering to switch out to branches before I add features. When you're pretty much the only person working on a particular code base, working on the master branch causes problems rarely enough that you tend to just do it. However, it's one of those things that I've known I shouldn't be doing for a while, so I'm glad I've finally had something to push me to remember. Now finally I can stop abusing git stash.

Anyway, I'm really going to try and make time for a few blog posts a week, since I often have things I think I should blog about but neglect to. Let's see how that goes.
