---
layout: post
title: Things I think I'll like about Jekyll
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 22 Dec 2008 - Johannesburg

Well, it's been all of ten minutes. No wait, maybe fifteen. Anyway, with that much exposure to it, this is a real first impressions type post. But here's what seems cool thus far.

h2. Uses Git (and integrates with GitHub)

I like the fact that I can edit blog posts from TextMate. I think a big reason for me never blogging is the fact that I have to think of going to my Wordpress site, logging into the admin section, and then composing a new entry. Now, this doesn't sound like much work (it really isn't), but I suppose I'm lazy, and so being able to do things from TextMate (which - on my machine - is open 95% of the time) makes the workflow just that little bit cleaner. Plus, I can push the changes out to GitHub with just a couple of keystrokes.

Admittedly, this is not solely a Jekyll feature, since much of it's utility depends on GitHub... Still, I'm viewing Jekyll from the angle of GitHub pages, so I think it's a fair point.

h2. You can hack on it. Easily

The code for this blog is pretty much straight HTML or Textile, with maybe 2 loops (using Liquid) to display the list of blog posts. You can't get simpler than that.

h2. And...?

Okay, so that's only two points. But what more could you ask for in a blogging engine? Basically, the features TPW wanted it to have are really useful, and seem to be exactly what I need to start blogging more often. Time will tell I suppose.